In previous videos in this section,
we looked at statements or block statements
that were executed conditionally.
Most of our examples included loop processing,
but in this video, we're gonna start
talking formally about loops,
which causes a set of instructions to execute repeatedly,
until a certain condition is met
or the element list being looped through is exhausted.
Loops are fundamental to structured programming
and Java supports three types of loops, the while loop,
the do while loop and the for loop.
So the while and do/while loops are similar by nature,
the do while loop always executes its statement block once
before checking the expression.
So the while loop executes until the defined condition
is met, any iteration counters are done in the code block.
You can see the example we've got there,
while, expression in parentheses,
we've got a code block,
and then the statements within the code block.
Do while well that always executes one time as I mentioned,
before the condition is checked,
and subsequently works similarly to the while loop.
So we've got a do, left and right kelly braces,
we've got our statements within the code block.
Then outside of the code block, we've got a while,
and the expression in parentheses.
All right so let's create a new class here,
I've created a new project called "loops".
And the class, we're going to create here
is called while loop.
Okay so there's the code.
Now this is a very simple while loop,
although a bit dangerous.
A minor change to the iterations variable,
for getting two increment for example,
cuts this code off into an infinite loop.
But what I want you to note,
is when keepGoing is toggled to false,
any statements after this are still executed.
The condition is only checked after all code
statements in the iteration are complete.
So if you run this code,
you can see that we've got three iterations being output.
All right so let's add a nested to the loop.
So I'm going to add the nested to loop
underneath the system for that top printIn statement.
Okay so there's our do while loop.
Now you can see the condition expression in the
do while loop will never actually be true,
because iterations is never zero.
But because it's a do while loop,
the code always executes once before evaluating
the while condition.
So if you run this code,
you see the output down the bottom.
Each iteration included one, and only one,
iteration of the nested do while loop.
So if we change the code on line 17,
change that from keepGoing equals false to break.
This forces the loop to stop executing immediately
and like just setting the conditioned variable to false.
So as a result, the code below that break
that I've just added will not execute and our last iteration
doesn't print anything out, the list will confirm that
when we run it.
So a loop break breaks out of the loop at the statement,
it's declared, so if we run this
and we can see we've now got a different result
in the output pane.
The continue statement is similar to the break statement,
such that the code below the statement will no execute
but it does not break out of the loop, instead
it just executes the next iteration of the loop,
first testing the condition of the loop.
So I'm gonna add some code, just below this line
that we've just worked on.
I'm going to type if,
parentheses,
iterations is equal to two, continue.
So if I run this now,
you can see what's happened there, we've literally
only got one iteration
as a result of adding that line.
Right, so next we're gonna look at the for loop
which is used either when your iteration count is known
or you have an iterable collection.
There are two flavours of the for loop,
the traditional for loop and the enhanced for loop.
So the traditional for loop has a built-in mechanisms
to control the initialization and updating
of the loop variable as well as
the comparison condition, termination section.
And the general form of the for loop is for,
parentheses, initialization, ;
termination ; increment and then we've got a code block
and then the actual statements we want executed.
When using this version of the for statement, keep in mind
that firstly, the initialization expression initialises
the loop, it's executed once as the loop begins.
It's initialization expression is optional.
When the termination expression evaluates to false
the loop terminates.
The termination expression also is optional,
it's default value is true.
The increment expression is invoked after each iteration
through the loop, it's perfectly acceptable
for this expression to increment or decrement a value.
The increment expression is optional.
And the enhanced for loop is used to loop through
an iterable set of data and to do something.
The format is for, parentheses, FormalParameter
: Expression and then statement outside of that parentheses.
The top of the expression must be iterable or an array type.
Right, so let's write some code with both the traditional
for loop and the enhanced for loop constructs for the same
set of data.
So we're gonna create a new class in our loops project
called ForLoopExample1.
So the code that I've pasted in demonstrates looping through
any command line arguments parsed when running the code.
We're using a traditional for loop with int
from zero to ars.length minus one
and we're doing that by the test for i being
less than args.length.
We're using an enhanced for loop further on down,
starting on line 23, iterating through the args array.
So if I run this first, obviously it won't do anything
because we haven't got any arguments,
but if we then change this and add some arguments.
Let's add three arguments.
Run this,
no real surprises there, there's our traditional for loop
and enhanced for loop.
Now some additional notes on loops.
It's interesting to note that loop is not a reserved word.
Any loop can have a break in it,
usually a conditional break.
Any loop can also have a continue statement in it,
also usually conditional.
Statements after the continue statement are skipped
until the next iteration.
And the following code is perfectly acceptable or legal
for a loop, an infinite loop in fact.
For, parentheses, two semi-colons in the parentheses
and then a ; outside.
All right, so that covers our review of loops.
The next video we're gonna demonstrate some not very common
place examples of the for loop, so let's move
on to that video now.